{{GeomLab}}
From this page, you can download the GeomLab programming
environment either in binary, executable form, or as source code that
can be compiled with a Java compiler (version 1.5 or later). The
software is covered by a permissive [[#Software licence|licence]] 
that is shown at the foot of this page. You can:
* Download GeomLab as a {{GeomResource|geomlab.jar|binary JAR file}}. (Saving this file on a Windows machine, for example, allows GeomLab to be started by double-clicking on the file.)
* Download the source code for GeomLab as a {{GeomResource|geomlab-src.jar|single JAR file}}. (JAR files can be unpacked with the @jar@ tool that comes with Sun's Java compiler, and they can also be opened by programs such as @WinZip@.)
* Read instructions for [[building GeomLab]] from the source code.
* Browse individual files of source code using the links below.

<div class="sourceList">
{{GeomSourceList}}
</div>

==Software licence==

<b>GeomLab version 3.0<br>
Copyright &copy; 2005-2011 J. M. Spivey<br>
Font data Copyright &copy; 2003 Bitstream, Inc.</b>

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
* The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
