<!--Introduction/intro-->
This {{IfWiki|website|booklet}} will introduce you to some of the most important ideas
in computer programming in an interactive, visual way through a guided
activity. The activity is about a language for describing
pictures. You will use a computer program that lets you type a
sentence in the language, and shows you the picture that it
describes. At first, the pictures you will make will be simple
combinations of stick figures: three men in a row, or one man
supporting two smaller men. But gradually, the pictures will get more
complicated, and soon we will be describing pictures like the one on
the entry page of this website. That picture looks frighteningly
complicated, but like all the pictures we will describe, it consists
of a few basic tiles combined according to some simple rules.

The point of this activity is not that the language of pictures is
useful in itself (although it has important uses in describing the
'pictures' that go into making integrated circuits), but that complex
pictures are a metaphor for the complex behaviours that are shown by
computer programs. For example, a word processor takes simple actions
like printing an individual letter or digit, and combines them into
the immensely complex activity of printing an entire document, with
each letter and digit in its right place. A spreadsheet takes the
simple actions of adding or subtracting or multiplying two numbers,
and combines these actions in complex ways to carry out elaborate
calculations. The aim of this activity is to let you understand
something of what it is like to write a computer program, why it is
that computer programming is difficult, and (we hope) why computer
programming is a fascinating activity that can be totally
absorbing.

To succeed in this activity, you will need to be prepared to think
very carefully about what will happen when you write different
expressions in our language of pictures. After a while, we will reach
sentences that are sufficiently complicated that you will not be able
to predict in complete detail what the computer will draw. Part of the
point of this activity is that, although the rules for interpreting
sentences in the language are simple and known, the effect of applying
them systematically can be difficult to imagine.  Because you will be
using a computer, when we ask you to think about what picture will
appear, it will be very easy just to type in the sentence, press the
button and see. That's all very well, but you will get a lot more out
of the activity if you can explain to yourself why the computer draws
the pictures it does.

Computers are very literal creatures, and you will soon discover
that, unless you type in each expression <i>exactly</i> as you see it
written on the worksheet, the computer will very likely complain that
it does not understand what you mean, usually by giving a rather
cryptic 'error message'. Any little mistake, such as a
spelling error or a missing bracket, will prevent the computer from
doing what you want. This is just a fact of life when using computers;
people have tried to make computer programs that can correct small
errors, but (like the spelling checkers that come with word
processors) the 'corrections' are often even less correct than the
original mistakes, so that idea is usually more trouble than it is
worth. At first, it seems humiliating that the computer is always
complaining about 'errors' in your work, but computer programmers soon
become used to just correcting the mistake and trying again.

Don't be afraid of trying different expressions to see what the
computer will do. The worst thing that can happen is that the computer
will not be able to make sense of what you type, and you will get
another of those 'error messages'. Or perhaps the computer
will draw a picture that is not quite the one you had in mind; in that
case, you should try to understand why the picture looks as it does,
then try again with a different expression. Just occasionally, the
picture that appears will not be the one you wanted, but will be
interesting in an unexpected way: that's one of the delights of
working with computer graphics.