If you came here by clicking on the Big Green Arrow,
then your web browser does not seem to have support for running Java
applications via Java Web Start, perhaps because it does not have a
recent version of Java installed.

Perhaps this is a false alarm, and Java Web Start is working in
your browser, although we have not been able to detect it. As a first
step, you should try to launch GeomLab directly by clicking on this link:
:<big>{{Resource|geomlab.jnlp|Launch GeomLab directly}}</big>
You will probably need to accept a security certificate before the
program will start, and the Java installation on your computer may
automatically upgrade itself first.

If your browser doesn't seem to know what to do with the link, then
that's probably because we were right, and Java is not installed. In
that case, you can download the free Java plug-in from Sun
Microsystems by [http://java.com/en/download/index.jsp clicking here]
and following the instructions. When the Java plug-in is installed,
[[GeomLab|return to the home page]] and try again.

On some browsers, it is also necessary to create a manual association
between Java Web Start scripts and the @javaws@ application. The mime
type for this is @application/x-java-jnlp-file@ and the extension is
@jnlp@.

As an alternative to using Java Web Start, you can download the
GeomLab application as a {{Resource|geomlab.jar|JAR file}} and run
it, either by double-clicking on the file, or from the command line,
using a command like
 java -jar geomlab.jar
If GeomLab still won't work, please [[contact us]], 
and we'll do what we can to help.
