These worksheets contain a progressive sequence of exercises using the
GeomLab programming environment. The first few worksheets introduce
the idea of building up complex pictures by transforming and putting
together simpler components. Then comes the idea of describing an
increasingly complex sequence of pictures by a recurrence relation
defining a recursive function. The final worksheet explores the
structure of M. C. Escher's woodcut "Square Limit", which can also be
described by a recurrence relation.

Each worksheet is provided as a web page that can be accessed by the
links below. But if your screen is not huge, it's probably best to
download and print out the [[Media:workbook.pdf|entire collection]] of
worksheets formatted as a PDF file. (Adobe PDF files require a
[http://get.adobe.com/reader reader program]
that is available free from the Adobe website.)

There's also a short 
[[Media:GeomLab-talk.ppt|PowerPoint presentation]] 
that I sometimes use to introduce the activity to small groups.

==The Worksheets==

[[Worksheet 1: Above and beside]].
Expressions can have pictures as their values, and there are
operations for joining two pictures vertically or horizontally.

[[Worksheet 2: Rotations and reflections]]. 
Pictures can be transformed by rotating them and flipping them over
(or reflecting them). Complex pictures can be built up from simpler
elements by using both these transformations and the combining
operators introduced earlier.

[[Worksheet 3: Definitions and functions]]. 
A specific operation on pictures can be captured by defining a
function, which can then be applied to different arguments. More
complex operations can be described by composing functions together.

[[Worksheet 4: Recurrences and recursion]]. 
By analysing the structure of a series of pictures, we can capture the
whole series in a recursive definition, so that a finite program can
describe an infinite variety of behaviour. For example, we can write a
GeomLab program that can draw a row of men of any length, or a crowd
of men consisting of any number of rows.

[[Worksheet 5: Spirals and zig-zags]]. 
By combining recursive definitions with rotations and reflections, it
is possible to generate geometric figures like zig-zags and
spirals. Again, a whole series of figures can be generated from one,
finite definition.

[[Worksheet 6: Escher pictures]].
M. C. Escher's woodcut "Square Limit" shows a tessellation of
fish-like figures that become smaller as they approach the edge of the
picture, so that an infinite number of figures is (in principle) shown
in a finite space. This picture can be made from a small number of
fixed tiles that are assembled in a way that is described by a
recurrence. As a final challenge, you are invited to find the
recurrence that describes another picture, not drawn by Escher, in
which the fish get smaller towards the centre.

[[Worksheet 7: Space-filling curves]]. 
These families of curves wiggle around so as to come close to every
point in a square region.  The curves on this sheet can be made with
the same two tiles that were used in Worksheet 5, but the patterns of
recursion are challengingly complex.

[[Worksheet 8: Turtle graphics]]. 
Other families of curves are difficult to make with tiles, and this
worksheet introduces another way of describing them: as sequences of
instructions for following the curve by turning to the left and to the
right.
